John Brennan confirmed as CIA director following <POI>White House</POI> drone statement

John O. Brennan was confirmed as CIA director on Thursday afternoon, after Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) expressed satisfaction with the response he had received to his questions about the Obama administration’s drone program.

Paul engaged in a nearly 13-hour talking filibuster against Brennan’s nomination on Wednesday, ending after midnight on Thursday morning. Throughout the filibuster, Paul said he simply wanted the <POI>White House</POI> to clarify that it would not use unmanned aerial drones to kill noncombatant American citizens on <COUNTRY>U.S.</COUNTRY> soil — a point he felt the administration hadn’t been clear enough on.

In a letter to Paul sent earlier Thursday afternoon, Attorney General Eric H. Holder gave him his wish.

“It has come to my attention that you have now asked an additional question: ‘Does the President have the authority to use a weaponized drone to kill an American not engaged in combat on American soil?’” Holder wrote. “The answer to that question is no.”

Paul said after receiving the letter that he would be happy to proceed with a vote on Brennan’s nomination.

“I’m quite happy with the answer, and I’m disappointed it took a month and a half and a root canal to get it,” Paul told CNN. “But we did get the answer. And that’s what I’ve been asking all along.”

The Senate voted soon after Paul gave the all-clear. Senators passed the 60-vote threshold required to cut off debate and bring Brennan’s nomination to a vote, with 81 senators voting to move forward. In the final vote, Brennan was confirmed 63-34.

Even as Paul eventually got what he wanted, though, his filibuster divided his party between the new generation of tea party-affiliated Republicans and the older generation of foreign policy hawks.

Perhaps the two most prominent hawks, Sens. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) and John McCain (R-Ariz.), took to the Senate floor Thursday to denounce Paul’s quest.

They offered a robust defense of anti-terror policies that began in the Bush Administration and had been warmly embraced by almost every congressional Republican, particularly the two leading GOP senators, Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and Minority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas).

In interviews afterward, McCain, the GOP’s leading national security voice for a decade, remained upset by Paul’s assertions that the Obama administration was leaving itself or a future administration the authority to attack a <COUNTRY>U.S.</COUNTRY> citizen who was a high-profile protestor, such as Jane Fonda, whose opposition to the Vietnam War rankled the Nixon White House.

“To somehow think that, under present circumstances, we would have killed Jane Fonda, that’s so ridiculous there’s no way to respond to it. It’s just an insult to your intelligence,” McCain told reporters Thursday.

Graham said he intended to oppose Brennan until Paul’s filibuster. “I am going to vote for Brennan now because it’s become a referendum on the drone program. Where were all these people during the Bush administration?”

Paul told reporters that there is now a “healthy debate” in GOP circles over the methods used in national security.

“It used to be monolithic that, whoever is in the country that we think is bad, we call them ‘enemy combatants,’ lock em up, throw away the key. ... People are starting to understand that just by calling them an enemy combat doesn’t make them an enemy combatant,” he said.

Paul said Thursday that his filibuster was somewhat spur of the moment. He had enough time for his staff to put together binders of information for him, but he didn’t make other special preparations.

He also said that the support of his colleagues — more than a dozen of them took part in the filibuster, including Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden (Ore.) — was mostly un-coordinated.

“And then really most of the senators came spontaneously, too,” Paul said during an appearance on Glenn Beck’s TV show. “We called one or two that do a lot with us to help us early on and then — but gradually, I’m not sure how many we had, but I’ll bet you we had 15 finally show up to be supportive.”

During a talking filibuster, senators are not permitted to leave the Senate floor or use the bathroom. Other senators can speak, but the filibustering senator may not even sit down.

The longest filibuster remains a 24-hour, 18-minute marathon speech by Sen. Strom Thurmond (S.C.) against the Civil Rights Act of 1957. According to the Senate historian, Paul’s filibuster is the ninth-longest on record.